docs/internals/performance-analysis.md, before:

# ToonDB Performance Issue Analysis

## Problem Statement

ToonDB insert performance is significantly slower than ChromaDB:
- **ToonDB**: 862 vec/s  
- **ChromaDB**: 14,258 vec/s (16.5x faster)

## Root Cause Analysis

### Profiling Results

Our comprehensive profiling reveals the bottleneck:

```
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                        Time Breakdown (1000 vectors)                       ║
╠════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╣
║ Phase 3: Neighbor Selection    │ 10,352ms │ 80.2% │ ← MAIN BOTTLENECK      ║
║ Phase 3: Add Connections       │  1,887ms │ 14.6% │                        ║
║ Phase 3: Search Layer          │    476ms │  3.7% │                        ║
║ Phase 1: Quantization          │      1ms │ <0.1% │                        ║
║ Phase 2: Map Insert            │      0ms │ <0.1% │                        ║
║ FFI/Python Overhead            │      0ms │ <0.1% │                        ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
```

**80% of time is spent in the RNG (Relative Neighborhood Graph) neighbor selection heuristic.**

### Why This Happens

The HNSW algorithm uses the RNG heuristic to maintain graph quality:

1. **For each inserted vector**: Search returns ~`ef_construction` candidates
2. **For each candidate**: Check if it's "shadowed" by previously selected neighbors  
3. **Each shadow check**: Requires full 768-dimensional cosine distance calculation

**Mathematical complexity**: O(N × ef_construction × max_connections × dimension)

With our current settings:
- N = 1000 vectors
- ef_construction = 200  
- max_connections = 16
- dimension = 768
- **Total distance calculations**: ~3.2 million
- **Each cosine distance**: 3 SIMD operations (dot product + 2 norms)

### Performance vs Quality Trade-off

| ef_construction | Throughput | Self-Recall | Speedup vs ef=200 |
|-----------------|------------|-------------|-------------------|
| 50              | 175 vec/s  | Poor        | 2.3x faster      |
| 100             | 121 vec/s  | Medium      | 1.6x faster      |
| 150             | 94 vec/s   | Good        | 1.2x faster      |
| 200             | 78 vec/s   | Excellent   | baseline          |

## ChromaDB vs ToonDB Configuration Differences

### ToonDB Current Settings
```python
VectorIndex(
    dimension=768,
    ef_construction=200,    # High quality, slow inserts
    max_connections=16,     # Standard HNSW parameter
)
```

### Likely ChromaDB Settings
ChromaDB likely uses more aggressive defaults optimized for speed:
```python
# Estimated ChromaDB equivalent
ef_construction=50-100     # Much lower for faster inserts
max_connections=16         # Similar
# Plus potential optimizations:
# - Quantized vectors (F16/BF16)
# - Batched distance calculations
# - Simplified neighbor selection
```

## Solutions

### 1. Immediate Fix: Reduce ef_construction

**Change**:
```python
# Current (slow)
VectorIndex(ef_construction=200)

# Optimized (2.3x faster)  
VectorIndex(ef_construction=50)

# Balanced (1.6x faster, good quality)
VectorIndex(ef_construction=100)
```

**Expected result**: 2-3x faster inserts with acceptable recall loss.

### 2. Medium-term Optimizations

1. **Batch Distance Computation**: 
   - Current: Scalar distance calculations in RNG loop
   - Optimize: Batch 8 candidates at once with SIMD (4-8x speedup)

2. **Distance Caching**:
   - Cache pairwise distances between candidates
   - Avoid recomputing same distances multiple times

3. **Progressive RNG**:
   - Use simple top-k selection for early inserts (sparse graph)
   - Switch to full RNG when graph becomes dense

### 3. Long-term Optimizations

1. **Quantization**: Use F16 vectors to halve memory bandwidth
2. **Parallel RNG**: Parallelize neighbor selection checks
3. **Adaptive Parameters**: Auto-tune ef_construction based on graph density

## Benchmark Configuration Issue

The benchmark results suggest the ToonDB test was likely run with:
- `ef_construction=200` (high quality settings)
- Single-threaded insertion
- Full RNG heuristic

While ChromaDB likely used:
- Lower ef_construction (~50-100)
- Optimized insertion pipeline
- Possibly simplified neighbor selection

## Action Items

### Immediate (1 hour)
1. Change default ef_construction from 200 to 100
2. Update benchmark to use consistent quality settings
3. Re-run performance comparison

### Short-term (1 week)  
1. Implement batched distance computation in RNG loop
2. Add distance caching
3. Add adaptive ef_construction based on graph size

### Medium-term (1 month)
1. Implement F16 quantization for 2x memory bandwidth improvement
2. Parallelize neighbor selection
3. Add comprehensive benchmarking suite

## Expected Results

With ef_construction=100:
- **Insert speed**: ~200-300 vec/s (3-4x improvement)
- **Recall**: 95%+ (minimal quality loss)
- **Search speed**: Unchanged (0.26ms)

With additional optimizations:
- **Insert speed**: ~1000+ vec/s (competitive with ChromaDB)
- **Recall**: 98%+ (equal or better quality)
- **Memory usage**: 50% reduction with F16

## Conclusion

The performance gap is **algorithmic, not architectural**. ToonDB is using high-quality HNSW settings that prioritize recall over insert speed. ChromaDB likely uses more aggressive defaults optimized for insertion performance.

The fix is straightforward: adjust the quality vs speed trade-off to match competitive benchmarks, then optimize the hot path (neighbor selection) for production use.

Commit message:

Rename project from ToonDB to SochDB
- Renamed all folders from toondb-* to sochdb-*
- Updated all package names in Cargo.toml files
- Renamed all types: ToonDB → SochDB, ToonTable → SochTable, etc.
- Updated all imports and module references
- Renamed Python package from toondb to sochdb
- Updated documentation, configs, and scripts
- Updated URLs and email addresses (toondb.dev → sochdb.dev)
- Kept toon-format as external crate dependency
- Added rename notice to README
- All builds and tests passing

docs/internals/performance-analysis.md, after:

# SochDB Performance Issue Analysis

## Problem Statement

SochDB insert performance is significantly slower than ChromaDB:
- **SochDB**: 862 vec/s  
- **ChromaDB**: 14,258 vec/s (16.5x faster)

## Root Cause Analysis

### Profiling Results

Our comprehensive profiling reveals the bottleneck:

```
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                        Time Breakdown (1000 vectors)                       ║
╠════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╣
║ Phase 3: Neighbor Selection    │ 10,352ms │ 80.2% │ ← MAIN BOTTLENECK      ║
║ Phase 3: Add Connections       │  1,887ms │ 14.6% │                        ║
║ Phase 3: Search Layer          │    476ms │  3.7% │                        ║
║ Phase 1: Quantization          │      1ms │ <0.1% │                        ║
║ Phase 2: Map Insert            │      0ms │ <0.1% │                        ║
║ FFI/Python Overhead            │      0ms │ <0.1% │                        ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
```

**80% of time is spent in the RNG (Relative Neighborhood Graph) neighbor selection heuristic.**

### Why This Happens

The HNSW algorithm uses the RNG heuristic to maintain graph quality:

1. **For each inserted vector**: Search returns ~`ef_construction` candidates
2. **For each candidate**: Check if it's "shadowed" by previously selected neighbors  
3. **Each shadow check**: Requires full 768-dimensional cosine distance calculation

**Mathematical complexity**: O(N × ef_construction × max_connections × dimension)

With our current settings:
- N = 1000 vectors
- ef_construction = 200  
- max_connections = 16
- dimension = 768
- **Total distance calculations**: ~3.2 million
- **Each cosine distance**: 3 SIMD operations (dot product + 2 norms)

### Performance vs Quality Trade-off

| ef_construction | Throughput | Self-Recall | Speedup vs ef=200 |
|-----------------|------------|-------------|-------------------|
| 50              | 175 vec/s  | Poor        | 2.3x faster      |
| 100             | 121 vec/s  | Medium      | 1.6x faster      |
| 150             | 94 vec/s   | Good        | 1.2x faster      |
| 200             | 78 vec/s   | Excellent   | baseline          |

## ChromaDB vs SochDB Configuration Differences

### SochDB Current Settings
```python
VectorIndex(
    dimension=768,
    ef_construction=200,    # High quality, slow inserts
    max_connections=16,     # Standard HNSW parameter
)
```

### Likely ChromaDB Settings
ChromaDB likely uses more aggressive defaults optimized for speed:
```python
# Estimated ChromaDB equivalent
ef_construction=50-100     # Much lower for faster inserts
max_connections=16         # Similar
# Plus potential optimizations:
# - Quantized vectors (F16/BF16)
# - Batched distance calculations
# - Simplified neighbor selection
```

## Solutions

### 1. Immediate Fix: Reduce ef_construction

**Change**:
```python
# Current (slow)
VectorIndex(ef_construction=200)

# Optimized (2.3x faster)  
VectorIndex(ef_construction=50)

# Balanced (1.6x faster, good quality)
VectorIndex(ef_construction=100)
```

**Expected result**: 2-3x faster inserts with acceptable recall loss.

### 2. Medium-term Optimizations

1. **Batch Distance Computation**: 
   - Current: Scalar distance calculations in RNG loop
   - Optimize: Batch 8 candidates at once with SIMD (4-8x speedup)

2. **Distance Caching**:
   - Cache pairwise distances between candidates
   - Avoid recomputing same distances multiple times

3. **Progressive RNG**:
   - Use simple top-k selection for early inserts (sparse graph)
   - Switch to full RNG when graph becomes dense

### 3. Long-term Optimizations

1. **Quantization**: Use F16 vectors to halve memory bandwidth
2. **Parallel RNG**: Parallelize neighbor selection checks
3. **Adaptive Parameters**: Auto-tune ef_construction based on graph density

## Benchmark Configuration Issue

The benchmark results suggest the SochDB test was likely run with:
- `ef_construction=200` (high quality settings)
- Single-threaded insertion
- Full RNG heuristic

While ChromaDB likely used:
- Lower ef_construction (~50-100)
- Optimized insertion pipeline
- Possibly simplified neighbor selection

## Action Items

### Immediate (1 hour)
1. Change default ef_construction from 200 to 100
2. Update benchmark to use consistent quality settings
3. Re-run performance comparison

### Short-term (1 week)  
1. Implement batched distance computation in RNG loop
2. Add distance caching
3. Add adaptive ef_construction based on graph size

### Medium-term (1 month)
1. Implement F16 quantization for 2x memory bandwidth improvement
2. Parallelize neighbor selection
3. Add comprehensive benchmarking suite

## Expected Results

With ef_construction=100:
- **Insert speed**: ~200-300 vec/s (3-4x improvement)
- **Recall**: 95%+ (minimal quality loss)
- **Search speed**: Unchanged (0.26ms)

With additional optimizations:
- **Insert speed**: ~1000+ vec/s (competitive with ChromaDB)
- **Recall**: 98%+ (equal or better quality)
- **Memory usage**: 50% reduction with F16

## Conclusion

The performance gap is **algorithmic, not architectural**. SochDB is using high-quality HNSW settings that prioritize recall over insert speed. ChromaDB likely uses more aggressive defaults optimized for insertion performance.

The fix is straightforward: adjust the quality vs speed trade-off to match competitive benchmarks, then optimize the hot path (neighbor selection) for production use.
